---
title: stop being so harsh on yourself
date: 2024-12-02
---

we are often our own harshest critics. that voice in your head - the one that berates you for every mistake,
every missed opportunity, every less-than-perfect moment feels relentless. you wouldn't talk to a friend this
way, or even a stranger. and yet, when it comes to yourself, the rules seem different.

why do we do this? part of it is cultural. society tends to glorify self discipline and grit, but it often
confuses these virtues with self-punishment. we've been conditioned to believe that being kind to ourselves
is indulgent, that it's the kind of thing only weak or complacent people do. but this isn't just wrong; it's
counterproductive. being kind to yourself doesn't make you weaker. it makes you resilient.

the problem with being harsh on yourself is that it creates a feedback loop. you make a mistake and berate
yourself for it. this makes you anxious or discouraged, which in turn makes it harder to do better the next
time. over time, you begin to avoid risks altogether because the cost of failure is too high. what starts as
self-discipline ends up as self-sabotage.

it doesn't just stop there. being harsh on yourself affects every corner of your life. it can cloud your
judgment, leaving you doubting every decision. it eats away at your confidence and makes you hesitant to try
new things, fearing fallout of even minor errors. it spills into relationships too. when you're unforgiving
toward yourself, it's hard to truly connect with others. you might push people away, retreat into
isolation, or lash out when your inner turmoil overflows. in the long term, this constant self-criticism can
lead to burnout, resentment, and a deep sense of dissatisfaction with ourselves, even when there's much in
your life to be grateful for.

think about how you treat others when they're struggling. when a friend messes up, you don't list their
failures or tell them they'll never succeed. instead you offer understanding. you remind them that mistakes
are part of the process. you help them see the big picture.

one of the worst culprits is overthinking. the "what ifs" and "maybes" pile up like mental clutter. you replay
conversations, analyzing every word, worrying about how others perceived you. did you sound stupid? did they
think less of you? it's exhausting. caring too much about what others think only amplifies the harshness. you
start living through their imagined perspectives instead of your own, judging yourself by standards you can't
even be sure they hold.

and here's the irony: i was being harsh on myself while writing this. that voice in my head kept asking,
"are you even qualified to write this? what if someone reads it and thinks it's pretentious or shallow?" it's
funny how self-doubt sneaks into even the act of writing about self-doubt. inception! but that's exactly why
this matters because being kind to yourself isn't a switch you flip once; it's a constant practice, a choice
you make again and again.

it's easy to say, "just stop being so harsh on yourself" but self-compassion takes practice. it's a skill,
like any other. the first step is noticing when you're being critical. pay attention to that inner voice and
question it. is it being fair? is it being constructive? often, the answer is no.

there's also a surprising benefit to being kinder to yourself: it makes you better at being kind to others.
when you stop judging yourself so harshly, you naturally become less judgmental of those around you. it's as
if the energy you once spent tearing yourself down becomes available for building others up.

life is hard enough without you being your own worst enemy. mistakes will happen, goals will go unmet, and
some days will feel like a slog, but none of that means you're failing. it just means you're human. and being
human is messy and imperfect, but it's also beautiful.

go out there - and forgive yourself first.
